cf-588E Solution (#2704)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/cf-588E.mdx

---
id: cf-588E
source: CF
title: Duff in the Army
author: Chongtian Ma
---

## Explanation

Note that for each two nodes $u$ and $v$, the path between them is just $u$ to
$lca(u,v)$ and $v$ to $lca(u,v)$. Also note the constraint of $a \leq 10$ for
each query. To answer each query, we only need to store the $10$ people with the

> smallest ids for the path from $u$ to $lca(u,v)$ and $v$ to $lca(u,v)$, and

Reviewer: this doesn't really make sense lol.

Author: what doesn’t?

Reviewer 2: it makes sense to me...is there anything specific that's confusing?

Reviewer: nvm

combine them. This can be done with binary lifting, which will store the $10$
smallest ids for each vertex to their $2^k$'th ancestor.

## Implementation

> We can answer each query in $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$ even though the constant
> factor is pretty bad, but the problem limits does give room for it. Note
> that if you do store more than $10$ smallest ids the problem will yield a MLE!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Time Complexity**: $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$
```

Author: the total complexity isn’t a log n, just for each query.
also why did you remove my paragraph lol

> We can answer each query in $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$ even though the constant
> factor is pretty bad, but the problem limits does give room for it. Note
> that if you do store more than $10$ smallest ids the problem will yield a MLE!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can answer each query in $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$. Even though the constant
factor is pretty bad, the problem limits give room for it. Note
that if you do store more than $10$ smallest ids the problem will yield a MLE!

**Time Complexity**: $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$ for each query
```
i think this paragraph is pretty good, shouldn't need to be removed

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

> const int N = 1e5+1;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const int N = 1e5 + 1;
```

const int L = 20; // approximately maximum log
 // for euler-tour
vector<int> enter_time(N), exit_time(N), depth(N);
int timer = 1;

// for binary lifting
vector<vector<int>> up(N,vector<int>(L)); // up[i][j] stores the 2^jth ancestor for i
// stores the (10) minimum people from the path from i to 2^jth ancestor
vector<int> minimum_up[N][L];

vector<int> graph[N];
vector<int> living_at[N]; // number of people living at each city

> void remove_extra(vector<int>& x){

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
void remove_extra(vector<int> &x) {
```
do the same with the others

	// keeps only the first 10 elements (note constraint on a)
	while(x.size() > 10){
		x.pop_back();
	}
}

// combine two vectors and keep the 10 minimum among them
void combine(vector<int>& a, vector<int> b){
	// combine vector b into vector a
	a.insert(a.end(), b.begin(), b.end());
	sort(a.begin(),a.end());
	remove_extra(a);
}

void dfs(int node, int parent){
	// initialize with direct parent information
	depth[node] = depth[parent] + 1;
	up[node][0] = parent;
	combine(minimum_up[node][0], living_at[parent]);

	enter_time[node] = timer++;
	for(int child: graph[node]){
		if(child != parent){
			dfs(child,node);
		}
	}

> 	exit_time[node] = timer-1;

Reviewer 2: space between ops

combine them. This can be done with binary lifting, which will store the $10$
smallest ids for each vertex to their $2^k$'th ancestor.

## Implementation

We can answer each query in $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$. Even though the constant
factor is pretty bad, the problem limits give room for it. Note
that if you do store more than $10$ smallest ids the problem will yield a MLE!

**Time Complexity**: $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$ for each query

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

const int N = 1e5 + 1;
const int L = 20; // approximately maximum log
 // for euler-tour
vector<int> enter_time(N), exit_time(N), depth(N);
int timer = 1;

// for binary lifting
vector<vector<int>> up(N,vector<int>(L)); // up[i][j] stores the 2^jth ancestor for i
// stores the (10) minimum people from the path from i to 2^jth ancestor
vector<int> minimum_up[N][L];

vector<int> graph[N];
vector<int> living_at[N]; // number of people living at each city

void remove_extra(vector<int> &x) {
	// keeps only the first 10 elements (note constraint on a)
	while(x.size() > 10){
		x.pop_back();
	}
}

// combine two vectors and keep the 10 minimum among them

> void combine(vector<int>& a, vector<int> b){

Reviewer 2: .

Author: aaa mb

	// combine vector b into vector a
	a.insert(a.end(), b.begin(), b.end());

> 	sort(a.begin(),a.end());

Reviewer 2: do the same for the rest

	remove_extra(a);
}

> void dfs(int node, int parent){

Reviewer 2: .

Author: whats wrong with this?

	// initialize with direct parent information
	depth[node] = depth[parent] + 1;
	up[node][0] = parent;
	combine(minimum_up[node][0], living_at[parent]);

	enter_time[node] = timer++;

> 	for(int child: graph[node]){

Reviewer 2: .

Author: what am i fixing?

		if(child != parent){
			dfs(child, node);
		}
	}
	exit_time[node] = timer - 1;
}

// checks if node a is an ancestor of b using euler tour

> bool is_ancestor(int a, int b){

Reviewer 2: .

	return enter_time[a] <= enter_time[b] && exit_time[a] >= exit_time[b];
}

int lca(int a, int b){

> 	if(is_ancestor(a, b))return a;

Reviewer 2: .

> 	for(int i = L-1; i >= 0; i--){

Reviewer 2: .

> 		if(!is_ancestor(up[a][i], b)){

Reviewer 2: .

			a = up[a][i];
		}
	}
	return up[a][0];
}

// gather all people going from a node to its k'th ancestor and
// store the minimums in the people array

> void trace_path(int node, int k, vector<int>& people){

Reviewer 2: .

	for(int i = 0; i < L; i++){

> 		if(k & (1 << i)){

Reviewer 2: .

			combine(people, minimum_up[node][i]);
			node = up[node][i];
		}
	}
}

int main(){
	int n,m,q;

> 	scanf("%d %d %d",&n,&m,&q);

Reviewer 2: .

	for(int i = 0; i < n-1; i++){
		int u,v;

> 		scanf("%d %d",&u,&v);

Reviewer 2: .

		graph[u].push_back(v);
		graph[v].push_back(u);
	}
	for(int i = 1; i <= m; i++){
		int city;

> 		scanf("%d",&city);

Reviewer 2: .

		living_at[city].push_back(i);
	}

	// sort from smallest to largest and keep the 10 minimums

> 	for(int i = 1; i <= n; i++){

Reviewer 2: .

		sort(living_at[i].begin(), living_at[i].end());
		remove_extra(living_at[i]);
	}

	dfs(1,1);

	// fill in information for binary lifting
	for(int k = 1; k < L; k++){
		for(int i = 1; i <= n; i++){
			up[i][k] = up[up[i][k-1]][k-1];
			// combine people from the left and the right
			combine(minimum_up[i][k], minimum_up[i][k-1]);
			combine(minimum_up[i][k], minimum_up[up[i][k-1]][k-1]);
		}

> 	}

Reviewer 2: .

> 	while(q--){

Reviewer 2: .
---
(optional)
use a for loop instead

		int u,v,a;
		scanf("%d %d %d",&u,&v,&a);
		vector<int> min_people;

> 		int least_common_ancestor = lca(u,v);

Reviewer 2: .

		// gather the people living at cities u and v
		if(least_common_ancestor != u){
			combine(min_people, living_at[u]);
		}
		if(least_common_ancestor != v){
			combine(min_people, living_at[v]);

> 		}

Reviewer 2: .

		// gather people living in path from lca to u and lca to v
		trace_path(u, max(0, depth[u] - depth[least_common_ancestor] - 1), min_people);
		trace_path(v, max(0, depth[v] - depth[least_common_ancestor] - 1), min_people);

		combine(min_people, living_at[least_common_ancestor]);

> 		int k = min((int)min_people.size(), a);

Reviewer 2: .

Reviewer 2: for this one, do
`(int)(min_people.size())`

Reviewer 2: bump

---
id: cf-588E
source: CF
title: Duff in the Army
author: Chongtian Ma
---

## Explanation

> Note that for each two nodes $u$ and $v$, the path between them is just $u$ to

Reviewer: is it the shortest path?

Reviewer 3: it's a tree, there's only one path

$lca(u,v)$ and $v$ to $lca(u,v)$. Also note the constraint of $a \leq 10$ for
each query. To answer each query, we only need to store the $10$ people with the
smallest ids for the path from $u$ to $lca(u,v)$ and $v$ to $lca(u,v)$, and
combine them. This can be done with binary lifting, which will store the $10$
smallest ids for each vertex to their $2^k$'th ancestor.

## Implementation

We can answer each query in $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$. Even though the constant
factor is pretty bad, the problem limits give room for it. Note
that if you do store more than $10$ smallest ids the problem will yield a MLE!

> **Time Complexity**: $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$ for each query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Time Complexity**: $\mathcal{O}(Q \times A \log N)$
```

Reviewer 3: I'm fine with it as is. if you want the full time complexity it would also need to include $na\log n + m\log m$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

const int N = 1e5 + 1;

> const int L = 20; // approximately maximum log

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const int MAXL = 20;
```

 // for euler-tour

> vector<int> enter_time(N), exit_time(N), depth(N);

Reviewer 3: might as well just do `array<int, N>` if fixed size

> vector<int> enter_time(N), exit_time(N), depth(N);

Reviewer 3: might as well just do `array<int, N> enter_time, exit_time, depth;` if fixed size

Reviewer: or maybe ```int enter_time[N], exit_time[N], depth[N];```

int timer = 1;

// for binary lifting

> vector<vector<int>> up(N,vector<int>(L)); // up[i][j] stores the 2^jth ancestor for i

Reviewer 3: same here: `array<array<int,L>, N>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
int up[N][L];
```

Reviewer 4: please no

// stores the (10) minimum people from the path from i to 2^jth ancestor
vector<int> minimum_up[N][L];

vector<int> graph[N];
vector<int> living_at[N]; // number of people living at each city

void remove_extra(vector<int> &x) {
	// keeps only the first 10 elements (note constraint on a)
	while (x.size() > 10) {
		x.pop_back();
	}
}

// combine two vectors and keep the 10 minimum among them
void combine(vector<int> &a, vector<int> b) {
	// combine vector b into vector a
	a.insert(a.end(), b.begin(), b.end());
	sort(a.begin(), a.end());
	remove_extra(a);
}

void dfs(int node, int parent) {
	// initialize with direct parent information
	depth[node] = depth[parent] + 1;
	up[node][0] = parent;
	combine(minimum_up[node][0], living_at[parent]);

	enter_time[node] = timer++;
	for (int child: graph[node]) {
		if (child != parent) {
			dfs(child, node);
		}
	}
	exit_time[node] = timer - 1;
}

// checks if node a is an ancestor of b using euler tour
bool is_ancestor(int a, int b) {
	return enter_time[a] <= enter_time[b] && exit_time[a] >= exit_time[b];
}

int lca(int a, int b) {
	if (is_ancestor(a, b)) {
		return a;
	}

> 	for (int i = L-1; i >= 0; i--) {

Reviewer 2: space out `l - 1`

		if (!is_ancestor(up[a][i], b)) {
			a = up[a][i];
		}
	}
	return up[a][0];
}

// gather all people going from a node to its k'th ancestor and
// store the minimums in the people array
void trace_path(int node, int k, vector<int> &people) {
	for (int i = 0; i < L; i++) {
		if (k & (1 << i)) {
			combine(people, minimum_up[node][i]);
			node = up[node][i];
		}
	}
}

int main(){
	int n ,m, q;

> 	scanf("%d %d %d", &n, &m, &q);

Reviewer: :sob: why not cin cout

Author: you know why

Reviewer 4: wait legitimately tho why

> 	for (int i = 0; i < n-1; i++) {

Reviewer 2: space out `n - 1`

		int u, v;
		scanf("%d %d", &u, &v);
		graph[u].push_back(v);
		graph[v].push_back(u);
	}
	for (int i = 1; i <= m; i++) {
		int city;
		scanf("%d", &city);
		living_at[city].push_back(i);
	}

	// sort from smallest to largest and keep the 10 minimums
	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
		sort(living_at[i].begin(), living_at[i].end());
		remove_extra(living_at[i]);
	}

	dfs(1, 1);

	// fill in information for binary lifting
	for (int k = 1; k < L; k++) {
		for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {

> 			up[i][k] = up[up[i][k-1]][k-1];

Reviewer 2: space out the `k - 1`s

			// combine people from the left and the right
			combine(minimum_up[i][k], minimum_up[i][k-1]);

> 			combine(minimum_up[i][k], minimum_up[up[i][k-1]][k-1]);

Reviewer 2: ^^

---
id: cf-588E
source: CF
title: Duff in the Army
author: Chongtian Ma
---

## Explanation

Note that for each two nodes $u$ and $v$, the path between them is just $u$ to
$lca(u,v)$ and $v$ to $lca(u,v)$. Also note the constraint of $a \leq 10$ for
each query. To answer each query, we only need to store the $10$ people with the
smallest ids for the path from $u$ to $lca(u,v)$ and $v$ to $lca(u,v)$, and
combine them. This can be done with binary lifting, which will store the $10$
smallest ids for each vertex to their $2^k$'th ancestor.

## Implementation

> We can answer each query in approximately $\mathcal{O}(a \log n)$. Even though the constant

Reviewer 3: why approximately?

factor is pretty bad, the problem limits give room for it. Note
that if you do store more than $10$ smallest ids the problem will yield a MLE!

> **Time Complexity**: $\mathcal{O}(na\log n + m\log m)$ for each query.

Reviewer 3: it's no longer per query. If this is supposed to be the overall time complexity, where's the $qa\log n$?

Author: wait im confused, were you suggesting the complexity per query or total?

Reviewer 3: I'm fine with the time complexity being either per query or total, as long as it's correct. the current version isn't
